Take notes as you read a judgment using our Virtual Legal Assistant and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (Query Alert Service). Try out our Premium Member services -- Free for one month.
Supreme Court of India
Bhajya S/O Shyama Kanbi vs Gopikabai And Anr. Etc on 4 April, 1978
Equivalent citations: 1978 AIR 793, 1978 SCR (3) 561
Author: Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
Bench: Ranjit Singh Sarkaria, N.L. Untwalia, P.S. Kailasam
           PETITIONER:
BHAJYA S/O SHYAMA KANBI

 Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GOPIKABAI AND ANR.  ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT04/04/1978

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
UNTWALIA, N.L.
KAILASAM, P.S.

CITATION:
 1978 AIR  793    1978 SCR  (3) 561
 1978 SCC  (2) 542
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF     1989 SC 222  (3)
 RF     1989 SC 516  (49)
 RF     1991 SC2301  (8)


ACT:
Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, (Code 11 of 1955), 1954
Section  151 r/w S. 4(2) of Hindu Succession Act  (Act 30),
1956-Interpretation  of the words 'subject to  his  personal
law' in Section 151, which provides "subject to his personal
law,  the interest of a tenure holder shall, on  his  death,
pass by inheritance, survivorship or bequest as the case may
be"-Whether   referable  to  Hindu  Succession Act,   1956-
Legislation by referential incorporation Categories of such
legislation-"Personal  law"  includes Hindu  Succession  Act
Hindu Success-ion Act, 1956, Sections 8, 15 & 16.



HEADNOTE:
The suit land which originally belonged to Ghusya, who died
before the Settlement of 1918, came into the possession  of
his  son  Punjya.   On Punjya death in the  year  1936,  the
holding  devolved on his widow Smt.  Sarji who continued  in
possession of the same till her death on 6-11-1956.  On  the
death  of  Sariji  the defendants  entered  into   wrongful
possession of the land.  Smt.Gopikabai, claiming inheritance
to  the Bhumidari   interest of Smt.  Sarij  deceased,
as  the  daughter  of the sister of the  last  male  holder.
Punjya, filed a suit for prossetion    of the suit land
and  also  for the  value  of the  crop.   The  defendants
contested  the suit claiming that they were Sapindas of  the
last male holder, Punjya (being his father's brother's son's
son), and as such were under the Hindu Law as prevailing  on
the  date  of  Punjya's death, entitled to  succeed  to  the
interest of the deceased tenure holder by virtue of  section
151  of  the M.P. Land Revenue Code 1954, the  operation  of
which  had  been  saved  by  Section  4  (2)  of  the  Hindu
Succession Act, 1956.
The  Trial  Court  decreed  the  suit; but  on  appeal  the
Additional District Judge set aside the decree of the  trial
Court  and  dismissed the suit.  The High Court,  in  Second
Appeal,  restored the trial Court's decree holding that  the
plaintiff  came under Clause (b) of Section 8 of  the  Hindu
Succession  Act,  and as such, was entitled  to  succeed  in
preference  to the  defendants who  are  agnatic  relatives
coming under clause (c) of that Section.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court
HELD : (1) From the conspectus of Ss. 2(7), 2(19), 2(20) and
Ss.  145,  147, 148, 151, 168, 172 of  Madhya  Pradesh Land
Revenue Code, 1954, the following points emerge clear :  (i)
A  'tenure-holder' and a 'tenant' have been  separately  and
distinctly  defined in clauses (20) and (19) of s. 2 of  the
1954  Code.  A 'tenant' according to the  definition,  holds
land  from a tenure-holder, but a  'tenure-holder  holds-and
directly from the State. (ii) A bhumiswami/ Bhumidhari pays
land revenue to the State and not rent; (iii) Tenancy rights
and  rights  of  Bhumiswami/Bhumidhari are  dealt  with  in
separate Chapters of the Code. Bhumiswami/Bhumidharies have
permanent  heritable  and transferable rights  in  the land
which cannot be taken away, except in certain cases.
        [565 G, 566 E-F]
(2) Even on the assumption, that S. 151 of the 1954 Code  is
a  law for  evolution of  tenancy  rights  in agricultural
holdings,  the section itself, in terms, makes personal  law
by  general  reference applicable  in the  matter  of  the
devolution  of the interest of a  deceased  tenure  holder
(i.e. Bhumiswami and Bhumidhar).
Smt.   Indubai v. Vyankati Vithoba Sawadhu and Ors..  A.I.R.
1966  Bom. 64 Kumari Ramlali v. Mst.  Bhagunti Hat and Ors.
A.I.R. 1968, M.P. 247 and Nahar Nirasingh and Ors. v. Mst.
Dukalhim & Ors., A.I.R. 1974 M.P. 141 referred to.
(3)  (a) There are no words in section 151 or  elsewhere  in
the Code which. limit the scope of the expression  "personal
law"  to  that prevailing on February'  5,  1955.   On  the
contrary  the  words "on his death" used in s. 151  clearly
show'
562
that  the  legislative intent was that  "personal  law"  as
amended upto the date on which the devolution of the  tenure
holders  interest is to be determined, shall to the rule  of
decision. [567 H, 568 A]
(b)   The  Legislature can  legislate on  a subject   by
referential    incorporation,  if    that    subject   is
constitutionally within its legislative competence.  Section
151  is  an instance  of legislation by  such  method.  The
State  Legislature enacted the 1954 Code in exercise of  its
power  under Entry V in the Concurrent List.  The 1954 Code
had  also  received the assent of the President  under Art.
254(2) of the Constitution. [567 E-G]
(c)    Broadly  speaking   legislation    by  referential
incorporation  falls  in  two categories :  First,  where  a
statute by specific reference incorporates the provisions of
another  statute as of the time of adoption.Second  where  a
statute incorporates by general reference the law concerning
a  particular  subject,  as a genus.  In  the  case  of  the
former,the  subsequent amendments  made  in  the   referred
statute  cannot  automatically be read  into  the  adopting
statute.  In the case of latter category,it may be  presumed
that   the  legislative  intent  was  to  include  all  the
subsequent  amendments also, made from time to time  in  the
generic  law  on the subject adopted by  general  reference.
[568 B-C]
(b) Constructed in accordance with the above principle,  the
expression "personal law" referred to in Section 151 of  the
Code,  comprehends  the Hindu Succession  Act, 1956,  which
will  undoubtedly govern the inheritance to the ,estate'  of
Smt.   Sarji  who died on November 6, 1956, much  after  the
coming into force of that Act. F568F-G]
Smt.   Indubai v. Vyankati Vithaba Sawadha and Ors.,  A.1.R.
1966 Bom. 64, Kumari Ramlali v. Mst.  Bhagunti Bai and Ors.,
A.I.R. 1968 M.P. 247 and Nahar Hirasingh and Ors.  v. Mst.
Dukalhin and Ors.. A.I.R. 1974 M.P. 141; approved.
(4)  Reading Section 15 with rule 3, set out in s.  16,  the
instant  case  will fall under Cl. (b) Sub-s. (2) of  s.  15
because  Shrimati Sarji died issueless and  intestate.  The
interest in the suit property was inherited by her from  her
husband.  The suit land will, therefore, under Cl.(b) go  to
the heirs of her husband, Punjya. [569 G-H]
(5)The expression "heirs" of the husband used in S. 15 is to
be  construed  with  reference to the date  on  which  the
succession  opens out and not with reference to the date  of
the  husband's death.  Once it is found that the case  falls
under  s. 15(2)(b) of the Hindu Succession Act, the  fiction
envisaged in Rule 3 of Section 16 is attracted, according to
which, for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  order   of
devolution  it is to be deemed as if the husband  had died
intestate  immediately after the female  intestate's  death.
[569 A, E, 570 B]
(6)  Section  8 of the Act provides that the property  of  a
male  Hindu dying. intestate shall devolve according to  the
provisions of this chapter :-
       (a)   Firstly.  upon  the  heirs,  being  the
       relatives   specified  ill  Class  1  of  the
       Schedule;
       (b) Secondly, if there is no heir of Class  1,
       then  upon  the  heirs,  being  the  relatives
       specified in Class 11 of the Schedule;
       (c) Thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the
       two  classes  then  upon the  agnates  of  the
       deceased and,
       Lastly,  if there is no agnate, then upon  the
       cognates of the
       deceased."
Now,  Smt.   Gopikabai, Respondent No.1  is  admittedly  the
daughter  of  the sister of the last  male  holder,  Punjya;
whereas  the,  appellants are his remote  agnates.   Neither
party  falls  under  Class 1  of  the  Schedule.   'Sister's
daughter' is Item 4 of Entry V in Class II of the  Schedule;
while  agnates do not figure anywhere in Class III.   Thus,
Smt.  Gopikabai's case will come in Clause (b); Secondly, of
S.  8 and, as such, she will be a preferential heir  of  the
husband of Smt.  Sarji, if he had died the moment after  her
death on November 6, 1956.  In this view. she would  exclude
the defendants from inheritance even
563
according to 'personal law' which, within the  contemplation
of  s. 151 of the Code, will include the  Hindu  Succession
Act,  1956,  in force at the time when Smt  Sarji  died  and
succession opened out. [570 C-F]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 2415 of 1968.
Appeal by Special Leave from the Judgment and Decree dated 10-7-68 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Second Appeal No. 3773 of 1962.
Y. K. Sanghi, A. G. Ratnaparkhi and G. L. Sanghi, for the Appellant.
U. R. Lalit, Y. N. Ganpule and Yeena Devi (Mrs.) Khanna, for the Respondent No. 1.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by SARKARIA J.-This appealing directed against a judgment of the,High Court of Madhya Pradesh.
The following is the genealogy of the parties Dewaji
-----------------------------------------------------------
 Jiwaji        Dhondya      Ghusya
      (wife Jhuli)
   Shioba        Shyam  -----------------
     Punjya        Turji
     (last Male  (Wd/o Janaji)
        Holder
  Sonu         Bhajya
     (Deft. No. 2)    (Deft No. 1) =Smt. Sarji
      Gopikabai
           (Wife of Mukundrao
           Pltff.-respdt. 1)
Smt. Gopikabai wife of Mukundrao, shown in the above pedigree-table, filed a suit in the Court of the Civil Judge, Multai, against the defendant-appellant, Bhajya, and Sonu, respondent 2, for possession of Bhumiswami rights in the land comprised in Khasra Nos.31 and 166 in the area of Village Kuthkhedi, Tehsil Multai, District Betul, Madhya Pradesh.
The suit land originally belonged to Ghusya son of Dewaji. Ghusya died before the Settlement of 1918 and thereafter, this land was held by his son, Punjya, who died in the year 1936. On Punjya's ,death, the holding devolved on Punjya's widow, Smt. Sarji Smt. Sarji died on November 6, 1956, and thereupon this dispute about the inheritance to the land left behind by Smt. Sarji, has arisen between the parties. Both the parties claim on the basis of Hindu Law. The plaintiff-respondent, Smt. Gopikabai, claims that she being the daughter of Smt. Turji, a sister of the last male holder, Punjya, is an heir under Section 15 read with Section 2 (II) (4) (iv) of the Schedule referred to in Section 8 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, whereas the defendants claim as sapindas of the last male holder under Mitakshra Law.
It is alleged by the plaintiff that Bhajya and Sonu, defendants, took forcible possession of the suit land after the death of Smt. Sarji.
Apart from possession, the Plaintiff claimed Rs. 180/- as damages for the crop removed by the defendants. The defendants' case, as laid in the, written statement, was that the suit property being an agricultural holding , in view of Section 4(2) of the Hindu Succession Act, the inheritance to the estate of Smt. Sarji who died on November 6, 1956, will not be governed by the provisions of that Act, but by Mitakshra School of Hindu Law, according to which the defendants are entitled to suit land to the exclusion of the last male holder's sister's daughter, the plaintiff.
The trial court decreed Smt. Gopikabai's claim. On appeal, the Additional District Judge set aside the decree of the trial court and dismissed the respondent's suit. In second appeal by the plaintiff, the High Court following its earlier decision in Kumari Ramlali v. Mst. Bhagunti Bai(1) held "that Bhumiswami and Bhumidhari rights are not tenancy rights and Section 151 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954, which deals with the devolution of interest of a Bhumiswami or a Bhumidhari tenure-holder, cannot be regarded as a provision dealing with the devolution of tenancy rights. Section 4(2) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, in no way saves Section 151 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code and it cannot be held that Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act does not affect the personal law according to which the devolution of the interest of a tenure-holder passes under Section 151 of the Code." The High Court further held that the expression "heirs of the husband" in Section 15(1) (b), as also in Section 15 (2) (b), refers to the heirs of the deceased husband, who would have succeeded under the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, if the husband had died on the date on which the female intestate actually died. On these premises, the High Court held that the plaintiff, Smt. Gopikabai, falls within clause (b) of Section 8, and, as such, is entitled to succeed in preference to the defendant- agnates coming under clause (c) of that Section. In the result, the plaintiff's appeal was allowed and the decree of the trial court was restored.
Hence, this appeal by special leave.
The contentions canvassed before us by Mr. Sanghi, learned counsel for the appellants, are as under
(i) Section 151 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954 (in short, the Code) was a law for the devolution of tenancy rights in agricultural holdings, because under the scheme of the Code, Bbumiswamis and Bhumidaris were tenure-
holders who could be included in the term "tenants". [Nahar Hari Singh v. Dukallun(2) and Sitabai v. Kothulal(2) were cited].
(ii) In view of the position stated at no. (i), Section 4(2) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, (for short called 'the Act) saved (1) L.P.A. 6 of 1965 decided on April 20,1968. (2) A.I.R. 1974 M.P. 141 (F.B.).
(3) A.I.R. 1959 Bom. 78.
Section 151 of the Code. Therefore, devolution of the agricultural holding left behind by the deceased tenure- holder 9 will be governed by Section 151 of the Code and not by anything provided in the Act.
(iii) The expression 'Personal Law' in Section 151 of the Code means the Hindu law which was in force before the enactment of the Act, when the Code was enacted on February 5, 1955, because the words "any law for the time being in force" in sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Act cannot be construed to mean any law which came into force subsequently.
(iv) In view of no. (iii), under Mitakshra Law (Sans the Act) the respondent being the daughter of the sister of the last male-holder, will be excluded from succession by the appellants, who are agnates of the husband of Smt. Sarji, deceased.
(v) Even if the Act applies, the expression "heirs of the husband" in Section 15, means heirs in accordance with the general Hindu law in force when the husband died, and not the heirs ascertained under Section 8 by fictionally postponing Punjya's death of 6th November, 1956, when Smt. Sarji died (Kampiqh v. Girigamme(1) relied upon). As against this, Mr. Lalit submits that-
(a) Section 151 of the Code is not a law dealing with devolution of tenancy rights in agricultural holdings and, as such,is not covered by the saving clause in Section 4(2) of the Act. Section 151 is confined to the devolution of the interest of a 'tenure-holder', the concept of which under the scheme of the Code, is different and distinct from a 'tenant. Chapter XI of the Code deals with 'tenants', while Chapter XII (in which Section 151 is placed) deals with 'tenure-hold%-.--.'.
(b) Even if a 'tenure-holder' includes a 'tenant', then also, Section 151 of the Code by reference makes the devolution of the interest of a deceased tenure holder "subject to his personal law" as on his death. Since Smt. Sarji died on November. 6, 1956, the 'personal law' which will govern the inheritance to her estate, is Hindu law, as modified by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, Under Section 15 read with Section 8 of the Act, Respondent no.1 being a preferential heir, will exclude the appellants from inheritance to the estate of Smt. Sarji. Before dealing with these contentions, it will be profitable to have a look at the relevant provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954.
"a Section 2 (7) of the Code defined a 'Holding' to mean, inter alia, a parcel of land separately assessed to land revenue". Section 2(20) defined a 'Tenure-holder'as"'a person holding land from the State Government as a Bhumiswami or a Bhumidhari". Section 2(19) defined a 'Tenant' as "a person holding land from a tenure-holder as an ordinary or an occupancy tenant under Chapter XIV'. Chapter XII dealt with tenure-holders. In that Chapter, Section 145 provided that there shall be two classes of tenure-holders of (1) A.I.R. 1966 Mysore 189.
lands held from the State, namely, (i) Bhumiswami and (ii) Bhumidhari. Sections 146 and 147 indicated the persons who could be descr ibed as Bhumiswamis and Bhumidharis. Section 148 provided that every person becoming a Bhumiswami or Bhumidhari, shall pay as land revenue-
(a) if he was paying land revenue in respect of the lands held by him-such land revenue,
(b) if he was paying rent in respect of the land held by him-an amount equal to such rent. It may be noted that Chapter XII of the Code further contains provisions for transfer of Bhumiswami or Bhumidhari rights and partition of Bhumiswami and Bhumidhari holdings when there are more than one, tenure holder. Tenancy rights are not dealt with in this Chapter, but separately in Chapter XIV Sections 168 and 172 in Chapter XIV deal with the devolution of rights of an ordinary tenant and an occupancy tenant. Those rights also pass on the death of a tenant in accordance with the personal law of the deceased.
Section 151, which is in Chapter XII, runs thus :
"Subject to his personal law, the interest of a tenure holder shall on his death pass by inheritance, survivorship or bequest, as the case may be."
From the above conspectus, the following points emerge clear:
(i) A 'tenure-holder and a 'tenant' have been separately and distinctly defined in clauses (20) and (19) of Section 2 of the 1954 Code. A 'tenant' according to the definition, holds land from a tenure-holder, but a 'tenure-holder' holds land directly from the State.
(ii) A Bhumiswami/Bhumidhari pays land revenue to the State and not rent.
(iii)Tenancy rights and rights of Bhumiswami/Bhumidhari are dealt with in separate Chapters of the Code.
Bhumiswamis/Bhumidharies have permanent heritable and transferable rights in the land which cannot be taken away, except in certain cases.
There is a conflict of judicial opinion as to whether Chapter XII in general and Section 151 in particular, is a law "for the devolution of tenancy rights in respect of agricultural holdings" within the saving clause in Section 4(2) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court (at Nagpur) in Smt. Indubai v. Vyankati Vithoba Sawadha & Ors.(1), held that the aforesaid provisions in the 1954 Code ate not such a law and the exception made in section 4(2) of the Act, cannot apply to them.
In view of the distinctive features of the rights of a tenure-holder, a Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, also, in Kumari Ramlali v. Mst. Bhagunti Bai & Ors.(2), took the same view, and held that Section 151 of the Code, which deals with devolution of (1) A.I.R. 1966 Bom. 64.
(2) A.I.R. 1968 M. P. 247.
the interest of a Bhumiswami or Bhumidhari tenure-holder, is not a provision dealing with devolution of tenancy rights' within the contemplation of Section 4(2) of the Act. A Full Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Nahar Hirasingh & Ors. v. Mst. Dukalhin & Ors.(1), by a majority of two against one, however, over-ruled on this point, the decision in Kumari Ramlali v. Mst. Bhagunti (ibid) and dissented from the Bombay view. But the Full Bench was not concerned with the interpretation of section 151 of the 1954 Code. The provision, the interpretation of which was in question before, the Full as Section 164 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code 1959 as it stood before its amendment in 1961. Whereas Section 151 of the 1954 Code, in terms, provided that personal law would be applicable in the matter of do devolution of the interest of a tenure holder (i.e. Bhumiswami and Bhumidhari), Section 164 of the, Code of 1959 (which had repealed and replaced the Code of 1954), as it stood at the material time, commenced not only with a non-obstante clause militating against the application of personal law, but also provided its own list of heirs and order of succession, which was different from that laid down in the, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
Be that as it may, for the purpose of deciding the case before us, it is not necessary to pronounce one way or the other, on the question whether Section 151 of the 1954 Code is a law for devolution of tenancy rights in agricultural holdings, because even on the assumption that it is such a law, Section 151 of the 1954 Code, itself, in terms, makes personal law applicable in the matter of. the devolution of the interest of a deceased tenure holder. Well then, does the expression "personal law" mentioned in Section 151, in the case of Hindus, means is contended by Mr. Sanghi-Hindu law as obtaining on February 5, 1955 when the 1954 Code came into force? Or, does it mean Hindu law, as amended by the Hindu Succession Act, prevailing on November 6, 1956, when Smt. Sarji died ?
It is well known that a Legislature can legislate on a subject by referential incorporation, if that subject is constitutionally within its legislative competence. Section 151 is an instance of legislation by such method. The State Legislature' enacted the 1954 Code in exercise of its power under Entry 5, in the Concurrent List (i.e. List III), which reads as under
"5. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy and succession; Joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in Judicial proceedings were immediately before the co- mmencement of ibis Constitution subject to their personal' law."
The 1954 Code had also received the assent of the President under Article 254(2) of the Constitution. The questions posed above turn on an interpretation of the language of &Won 151. 'Mere are no words in that Section or elsewhere (1) A.I.R. 1974 M.P. 141 on the Code, which limit the scope of the expression "personal law" to that prevailing on February 5, 1955. On the contrary, the words " on his death" used in Section 151, clearly show that the legislative intent was that 'personal law' as amended upto the date on which the revolution of the tenure holder's interest is to be determined, shall be the rule of decision.
Broadly speaking, legislation by referential incorporation falls in two categories : First, where a statute by specific reference incorporates the provisions of another statute as of the time of adoption. Second, where a statute incorporates by general reference the law concerning a particular subject, as a genus. In the case of the former the subsequent amendments made in the referred statute can not automatically be read into the adopting statute. In the case of latter category, it may be presumed that the legislative intent was to include all the subsequent amendments also, made from time to time in the generic law on the subject adopted by general reference.This principle of construction of a referred statute has been neatly summed up by Sutherland, thus " A statute which refers to the law of a subject generally adopts the law on the subject as of the time the law is invoked. This will include all the amendments and modifications of the law subsequent to the time the reference statute was enacted." (Vide, Sutherland's Statutory Construction, Third Edition, Article 5208, page 5208). Corpus Juris Secundum also enunciates the same principle in these terms ".....Where the reference in an adopting statute is to the law generally which governs the particular subject, and not to any specific statute or part thereof, . . . ...the reference will be held to include the law as. it stands at the time it is sought to be applied, with all the changes made from time to time, at least as far as the changes are consistent with the purpose of the adopting statute."
Constructed in accordance with the above principle, the expression law" referred to in Section 151 of the Code, comprehends the Hindu Succession Act 1956, which will undoubtedly govern the inheritance to the 'estate of Smt. Sarji who died on November 6, 1956, much after the coming into force of that Act. If we can say so with due deference, the view taken on this point by the Bombay High Court in Smt. Indubai's case (ibid) and by the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Kumari Ramali's case (supra) and by Tare C.J. in Nahar Hirasingh's case (ibid) is correct. The further question to be considered is which of the parties is entitled to succeed to the interest of Smt. Sarji deceased under the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 ?
The General Rules of succession in the case of a female Hindu dying intestate are given in Section 15 of the Act, which so far as it is material for the purpose, reads as follows :-
"15 (1) The property of a female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules set out in Section 16-
(a) upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any predeceased son or daughter) and the husband;
(b) upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) to (e) (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),-
(a)..............................
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or from her father-in-law shall devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any predeceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to 'in sub-section (1) in the order specified therein, but upon the heirs of the husband."
This Section should be read along with the Rules set out in Section 16, the material part of which runs as under :
"The order of succession among the heirs referred to in Section 15 shall be, and the distribution of the intestate's property among those heirs shall take place according to the following rules, namely :-
"Rule 1........
Rule 2..........
Rule 3.-The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs referred to in clauses
(b), (d) and (e) of sub-section (1) and in sub-section (2) of Section 15 shall be in the same order and according to the same rules as would have applied if the property had been the father's or the husband's as the case may be, and such person had died intestate in respect thereof immediately after the intestate's death."
(Emphasis supplied) The instant case will fall under clause (b), sub-section (2) of Section 15, because Smt. Sarji died issueless and intestate. The interest in the suit property was inherited by her from her husband. The suit land will, therefore, under clause (b), go to the heirs of her husband, Punjya. 2-315SCI/78 The next question is, whether "the heirs of the husband" in Section 15 are to be with reference to the date of Punjyas demise in 1936, or with reference to the date of Shrimati Sarji's death on November 6, 1956, when succession opened out.
There appears to be some divergence of opinion among the, High Courts on this point. We are however of opinion that once it is found that the case falls under Section 15 (2)
(b), the fiction envisaged in Rule 3 of Section 16 is attracted, according to which, for the purpose of ascertaining the order of devolution, it is to be deemed as if the husband had died intestate immediately after the female intestate's death. Bearing this fiction in mind we have then to go to the Schedule under Section 8 of the Act to find out as to who would be the heirs of Smt. Sarji's husband on the date of her death. Section 8 of the Act provides that the property of a male Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the provisions of this Chapter :-
"(a) Firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in Class 1 of the Schedule;
(b) Secondly, if there is no heir of Class 1, then upon the heirs, being the relatives specified in Class II of the Schedule;
(c) Thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes*, then upon the agnates of the deceased; and Lastly, if there is no agnate, then upon the cognates of the deceased."
Now, Smt. Gopikabai, Respondent 1 is admittedly the daughter of the sister of the last male holder, Punjya; whereas the appellants are his remote agnates. Neither party falls under Class I of the Schedule. 'Sister's daughter' is Item 4 of Entry IV in Class II of the Schedule; while agnates do not figure anywhere in Class II. Thus, Smt. Gopikabai's case will come in clause '(b) Secondly', of Section 8 and, as such, she will be a preferential heir of the husband of Smt. Sarji, if he bad died the moment after her death on November 6, 1956. In this view, she would exclude the defendants-agnates from inheritance even according to 'personal law' which, within the contemplation of Section 151 of the Code, will include the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, in force at the time when Smt. Sarji died and succession opened out.
In the result, we affirm the judgmentand decree of the High Court and dismiss this appeal with costs.
S.R.     Appeal dismissed.